.. _cxx-fortran:


Mixing C++ and Fortran
======================

.. questions::

   - Can we use CMake to build mixed-language projects?

.. objectives::

   - Learn how the built-in ``FortranCInterface`` module can help you work with
     projects mixing Fortran and C/C++.


CMake has native support for many programming languages. At the time of writing,
C, C++, Fortran, CUDA, Objective-C, ISPC, and ASM are officially supported.
When programming applications and libraries in a scientific context, it is often
required to mix components written in different languages. This is mostly true
because legacy, tried-and-true components are extremely hard to replace by
non-professional programmers.
In this episode, we will show how to mix Fortran and C/C++.

In order to use multiple languages in your project, you can declare it within
the |project| command:

.. code-block:: cmake

   project(my-project LANGUAGES CXX Fortran)

Languages can also be declared later on in your ``CMakeLists.txt`` with
invocations to the ``enable_language`` command.

The workhorse module for mixing C/C++ and Fortran is the built-in
``FortranCInterface`` module.  Whether you are working in Fortran and linking a
C/C++ library or viceversa, you should **always** check that the compilers for
the two languages are able to talk to each other.
That is where the |FortranCInterface_VERIFY| function comes into play:

.. code-block:: cmake

   include(FortranCInterface)

   # if you are working with C and Fortran
   FortranCInterface_VERIFY()

   # if you are working with C++ and Fortran
   FortranCInterface_VERIFY(CXX)


Fortran using C/C++
-------------------

If you are using Fortran2003 (and beyond), it is fairly straightforward to
employ C/C++ libraries. The ``iso_c_binding`` built-in module was indeed
mandated by the standards' committee starting from the 2003 edition, and
provides a standardized interface between C, the *de facto lingua franca* of
programming, and Fortran.
We will not delve into the details of ``iso_c_binding``,
suffice it so say that interoperability between basic datatypes, pointers, and
function call conventions is nowadays well-established. [#iso_c_binding]_

.. challenge:: A Fortran executable using a C/C++ library

   In this exercise, you will build a Fortran executable linking to libraries
   written in C++ and the system library ``backtrace``, written in C.

   Get the :download:`scaffold code <code/tarballs/fortran-cxx.tar.bz2>`.
   The project has the following source tree:

   .. code-block:: text

      fortran-cxx/
      └── src
          ├── bt-randomgen-example.f90
          ├── interfaces
          │   ├── interface_backtrace.f90
          │   ├── interface_randomgen.f90
          │   └── randomgen.cpp
          └── utils
              └── util_strings.f90

   #. Add ``CMakeLists.txt`` files where necessary. You can either declare
      Fortran, C++, and C as project languages, or enable C++ and C in the
      ``interfaces`` folder.
   #. In the ``src`` folder, create an executable from the
      ``bt-randomgen-example.f90`` file. This executable will have to be linked
      to the libraries created in the ``utils`` and ``interfaces`` folders.
   #. Modify the scaffold ``CMakeLists.txt`` in the ``interfaces`` folder to
      build a shared library from the C++ and Fortran sources. **Remember**, for
      CMake to resolve Fortran modules dependencies, you need to specify the
      corresponding sources with ``PUBLIC`` visibility level.
   #. Do not forget to verify that the C/C++ and Fortran compilers are compatible!

   You can download the :download:`complete, working example <code/tarballs/fortran-cxx_solution.tar.bz2>`.

C/C++ using Fortran
-------------------

Whenever wanting to mix C and Fortran, one needs to be aware of some fundamental
differences between the languages:

- Fortran arrays are column-major.
- All function arguments are passed by-reference.
- Fortran compilers *mangle* function names. Usually by adding an underscore at the end.
- Fortran is case-insensitive.

Fortran90 introduced a number of modern features: *modules*, *function
overloading*, and *user-defined types*. These features further complicate
interoperability: they require compilers to perform more extensive `name
mangling <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Name_mangling>`_. As the mangling is not
standard-mandated, each vendor can decide how to perform it.

The ``FortranCInterface`` module fortunately comes to the rescue!


.. challenge:: A C/C++ executable using a Fortran library

   Your goal is to link a C++ executable to a Fortran library.

   Get the :download:`scaffold code <code/tarballs/cxx-fortran.tar.bz2>`.

   You can download the :download:`complete, working example <code/tarballs/cxx-fortran_solution.tar.bz2>`.


.. keypoints::

   - Always check whether the Fortran and C/C++ compilers you are using are
     interoperable.
   - Fortran name-mangling header files for C/C++ can be conveniently
     autogenerated by CMake.



.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#iso_c_binding]

   You can find out more about ``iso_c_binding`` and Fortran/C interoperability
   in the `GNU Fortran manual
   <https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gfortran/Interoperability-with-C.html>`_.
